How do many people react
when they see corruption and injustice?
They become incensed,
and they want to fix the problem.
How do they try to fix the problem?
By becoming involved
in political efforts or social movements
that claim to fight corruption and injustice.
In contrast,
why do Jehovah’s Witnesses not get involved
in political efforts or social movements?
The simple answer is
because they’ve learned from God’s Word
that the problems of this world
cannot be corrected.
Ecclesiastes 1:15 says:
“What is crooked cannot be made straight.”
Satan’s world around us
is like the trunk of a tree
that has grown so crooked, twisted, gnarled
that it cannot be made straight.
Jehovah’s Witnesses have learned
that it would be futile
to spend our time and energy
trying to correct what Jehovah tells us
cannot be corrected.
Additionally, Jehovah’s Witnesses
have learned how and where
real peace can be found even now.
In this regard,
let’s consider two modern-day examples
of ones who came
to acquire Jehovah’s thinking
on this matter.
Let’s talk about Egidio Nahakbria
and Frede Bruun.
Now, first Egidio
—born in a remote part of East Timor,
he experienced horrible
guerrilla warfare during his childhood.
Many of his neighbors
disappeared or were killed,
and he feared he would be next.
But some years later,
he moved to the capital city
and entered a university
where he met many other youths
with backgrounds similar to his.
He became part of a student group
that was trying to achieve social change
through political action.
Many political demonstrations were organized,
but most ended up in riots,
with many of his friends injured.
Some were even killed.
But then through a relative
who was studying with Jehovah’s Witnesses,
Egidio started to study.
Now, here’s what he said
as he started this study:
“As I studied the Bible,
“I began to feel that I had
never really known love.
“Despite my rough
appearance and disposition,
“the Witnesses treated me
with ‘fellow feeling’
and ‘brotherly affection.’”
Well, soon he was baptized,
became a regular pioneer,
and he was so happy because now he knew
he was truly helping people.
He ended his life story with these words:
“In the past,
I felt angry, unloved, and unlovable.
“But thanks to Jehovah,
at last I have found true love and peace!”
But now let’s talk about Frede.
From an early age,
he was very upset
by all the hatred, bloodshed,
and war he saw around him.
But especially was he disturbed
by religion’s role in all of this.
He observed that much
of this hatred, bloodshed, and war
was encouraged, supported,
or at least condoned by religion.
But in 1955, he attended
a convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
And after the convention,
he accepted a Bible study.
Now, during his studies,
he learned many wonderful things,
but something he learned
really motivated him.
He learned the identity
of the “great prostitute,”
Babylon the Great,
mentioned in Revelation chapters 17 and 18.
He learned that this prostitute
is the world empire of false religion.
Then he was really amazed
when he was shown Revelation 18:24,
which says:
“In her [the prostitute] was found the blood
of all those
who have been slaughtered on the earth.”
So he learned that the world’s religions
could never be a force
for international peace
because they take sides,
they’re divided,
and they go to war.
In contrast,
he saw that Jehovah’s Witnesses
are an international brotherhood
that truly practices what Jesus taught.
Frede’s progress was very fast.
He got baptized, started pioneering,
attended the 50th class of Gilead,
and has served many years in Guatemala,
helping people (as he was helped)
to find the true Source of peace.
But now we ask,
What are lessons we can learn
from Egidio and Frede?
Well, many,
but here are three big ones.
Number one:
We can never correct the corruption
and injustice of this world
by means of political efforts
or social movements.
That reminds me
of the illustration a brother used
about trying to get rid of a problem
with spiderwebs but being unable
to get rid of the spider.
You knock the webs down;
the spider builds them right back.
You knock them down;
it builds them back.
You never get rid of the problem.
Well, in this illustration,
Satan is the spider.
And since he’s the source
of corruption and injustice,
as long as he exists,
the problem will exist.
Little puny humans can’t get rid of Satan.
He’s superhuman,
so the solution must also be superhuman.
And that’s where God’s Kingdom comes in.
God’s Kingdom can and will
not only get rid of the webs
but the old spider Satan himself too.
Now here’s our second lesson:
We must remember that political activism
often leads to violence,
which is the opposite of peace.
We pursue peace
—don’t we?—
not conduct that often leads to violence.
Our third lesson:
Unlike the religions of this world,
we must promote peace with all people,
which definitely means
we refuse to get involved in any way
in the wars of Satan’s world.
That reminds me of an experience
a young brother had in the ministry.
A very emotional woman said to him:
“My son died
“for you to have the freedom you have.
Why won’t you fight for your country?”
Well, very calmly,
the young brother said:
“I’m very sorry
about the loss of your dear son.
“But one thing I can guarantee you
“is that it was not
one of Jehovah’s Witnesses
“who killed your son.
“Now, I don’t know if you can make
that guarantee about your religion,
but I can make that guarantee.”
Well, as it turned out,
she was Catholic,
so she definitely was unable
to make that guarantee.
So let’s remember
these three powerful lessons
that we have discussed.
But now we’d like to say
to you dear interested ones in attendance,
if you’re not yet one of Jehovah’s Witnesses,
we warmly invite you to please
study the Bible with us.
See for yourself how genuine love
is the best way of life
and is the best way to deal with the problems
that divide society today.
Jesus made it crystal clear
that the identifying mark
of true Christians is love.
At John 13:35, he said:
“By this all will know
that you are my disciples
—if you have love among yourselves.”
So dear interested ones,
see for yourself whether this genuine love
exists among Jehovah’s Witnesses.
But now we say to those of you
who are already Jehovah’s Witnesses,
please continue to cultivate and show
“love for the whole association of brothers.”
And doing so will require
that you remain strictly neutral
regarding the world’s political affairs
and other controversies,
just as our Leader remained neutral.
At John 17:14,
Jesus said of his disciples:
“They are no part of the world,
just as I am no part of the world.”
So during discussions in the ministry
or anywhere for that matter,
remain strictly neutral
on political topics.
Take no position regarding what laws
should be enacted,
repealed, or changed.
And don’t pressure others
to agree with your view.
But to succeed in this,
we must be careful not to allow
the media of this world
to manipulate our thinking.
News broadcasts are often presented
in a biased, opinionated way.
So we’ve got to be careful
not to adopt the bias of a commentator.
Only if we keep our thinking neutral
will we be able to keep
our speech and actions neutral also.
And remember, your good example
of showing love in Christian neutrality
may attract honest-hearted ones to the truth.
But now we ask,
What have we learned from this symposium?
Well, let’s highlight just one
valuable takeaway lesson
from each of our six parts.
The first part,
“Joseph and His Brothers”:
Our lesson is sow peace
by letting go of resentment.
The second part,
“The Gibeonites”:
Humbly submit to Jehovah’s will,
even if it differs from what you prefer.
The third part,
“Gideon”:
Prevent conflicts from escalating
by choosing words that calm,
reassure, and heal.
The fourth part,
“Abigail”:
Do what you can to promote peace,
and then leave matters with Jehovah.
The fifth part,
“Mephibosheth”:
Be willing to suffer loss
rather than disturb the peace
in the congregation.
And just another thought on this:
Let’s always remember
that defending Jehovah’s name and reputation
is far more important
than trying to defend
our own name and reputation.
Be willing to suffer loss
rather than disturb the peace
in the congregation.
The sixth part (this part),
“Modern-Day Examples”:
Serve the God of peace with his people,
and you will have peace.
Yes, during this symposium,
we’ve learned many valuable lessons
as to how we can sow peace.
Let’s all be determined to do so
with all our heart.
And what will be the final result?
For the answer,
let’s watch the final dramatization
of this symposium.
There’s one more story to tell.
I didn’t know it at the time,
but seeds of truth
were being planted in my heart.
You were all so different.
I couldn’t understand it.
You were prisoners, yes,
but you felt free
—truly free.
After you were released,
it became clear to me
that you have God’s blessing,
and I wanted to know why.
Phil helped me find the answer.
“And you will know the truth,
and the truth will set you free.”
Phil encouraged me to make the truth my own.
I had real trouble at first.
With all the turmoil going on at the time,
the idea of being peaceable
and waiting on God’s Kingdom
—it was hard to grasp.
But with Jehovah’s help
and the patience of these good people,
I was baptized
before the start of the great tribulation.
Joseph, during our time in prison,
the story of your life
—your time in prison
and how Jehovah was always with you—
became a real source of strength
for us.
I remember one day,
Carl said—
What did you say?
I said, “One day,
we’ll have a meal with Joseph,
and we’ll say ‘thank you.’”
And here we are!
Really, it’s I who should thank you.
Each and every one
of your stories
touches my heart.
You know a lot about my life,
but would it be all right
if I shared a few more stories?
Please!
We have so many questions.
Can you tell us about Egypt?
What was Pharaoh really like?
Dreams!
We have to talk about those dreams.
You do have many questions!
And I have many details to share.
And thanks to our God, Jehovah,
we have all the time we need.
What a touching video!
If we wholeheartedly sow peace,
we’ll ‘save ourselves
and those who listen to us.’
But what fundamental truth from our great God
have we discussed during this symposium?
It’s expressed at Galatians 6:7:
“For whatever a person is sowing,
this he will also reap.”
If we sow a tomato seed,
we will always get tomato plants.
Well, this unfailing fundamental truth
applies to peace.
If we sow peace,
we will always reap peace.
Although in some cases,
it may take some time
for the peace we sowed to bring good results.
But if we persevere in sowing peace,
we will reap peace of mind,
peace with others and, most important,
peace with Jehovah.
And we’ll reap the reward
of living forever in a world
where there will be an abundance of peace.
So let’s be determined to sow peace now
so that we can reap peace forever.
And if you think about it,
that’s a pretty good investment
of our time and effort, isn’t it?
Sow peace now
and reap peace forever.